---
layout: post
title: Ronin - Week 9, what happened?
date: 2016-03-16 22:02
categories: makers blog ronin
tags: [makers]
---

Almost a month since my last blog post, and I haven't written recaps for weeks 6, 7 and 8. Well, here it is, I'll be brief because I really don't have that much time right now. You can probably guess by my lack of updates is due to the workload getting much heavier, and indeed you'd be right.

Week 6 - Our first project week, which was to build an Air BnB clone (Makers BnB) with Ruby and Sinatra on the backend and using CSS and jQuery on the frontend. Week 6 at Makers is traditionally a lab week, where students get some time out for some self-guided study - either to consolidate their existing knowledge or focus on learning a new technology (MEAN and Node.js are often mentioned) - for us Roniners, our coach decided to put us in small groups to give us our first project experience working to a brief set by a fictional client, along with a mockup of how he/she envisioned the MVP should look and behave. I found this week to be extremely challenging and exhausting, but upon reflection I think I've gained alot from the experience.

Week 7 - Ruby on Rails. This is a major part of the course, and is usually regarded as the main technology that Makers Academy is known for. After the previous week, it was nice to get back to our 'usual' routine of pairing up daily according to our Mechacoach Slackbot, whose randomization algorithm is only known to a select few at Makers HQ. Rails being Rails, the course material was really dense and that meant that for most of the week we were following a tutorial to build a Yelp clone, as opposed to the previous weeks where we were often challenged to try things out first. Although this was disappointing, I can understand the reason why this is really difficult to implement in a similar way. The good news is that the coaches are aware of the problem and are currently working on a way to improve Rails week by making it project based for future cohorts.

Week 8 - AngularJS. One of the 'shinier' and hugely popular (and in demand) JavaScript frontends that exist amongst the many. Its also from those clever bods at Google, need I say more? If it was not for the improvements in the course structure, this week would have been a follow on from Rails week (i.e. follow this tutorial, verbatim). However, this was not the case since Sam and Leo managed to push through the changes in time, so the week involved a mixture of following a tutorial (Google's own Phone Cat tutorial), some workshops focusing on controllers, services and factories and midway through the week, being put into project groups again with the task of building a Single Page Application entirely in Angular that makes use of Github's API for searching and displaying users via JSON requests. So far for me, this was my most favourite week. Despite feeling out of my depth at the beginning, by the end of the week things started to click for me, and with my team mates we worked into the weekend (fortunately there wasn't a weekend challenge) to finish off our SPA by implementing some nice responsive CSS. Seeing Flexbox in action on the Sunday evening was hugely satisfying, a real turning point for me. The Roniners more adept at CSS in my cohort have advocated just trying things out, and I now know why - it can actually be really fun!

Ok, so now I'm all up-to-date with my blog, so I can sleep well tonight. Just kidding! This week is another project week, involving Rails and Angular, but more on that in a future blog post. Even though I haven't been regular with this blogging, the weekly video logs I'm producing for Makers are something that I'm managing to put out regularly and consistently so one thing I'm looking forward to at the end of the course is to go back and watch them in sequence to see how much I've learned and changed. We're less than 3 weeks away from graduation, and still a lot to learn in these final weeks. So its a :wq, jekyll build and git add, commit and push origin master until next time!

